---
layout: post
title:  "A Vaccine?"
---
## On Rapid Vaccine Development

The assertion that we will have a COVID-19 vaccine by winter is troubling. So is the "Operation Warp Speed" push to fund scale-up of untested vaccines. We need to scale up one that works, not gamble on ten that probaby won't.

Vaccine development takes time. A lot of it. The way vaccine trials work you have to find a vaccine that works in animals and establish basic human safety first. That's not too hard and some companies are already following vaccinated people. The slow part is showing the vaccine works. The Phase 3 studies to establish efficacy are enormous, typically between 10,000 and 30,000 people. To do that study a company has to manufacture the vaccines, find willing people, get them to consent to taking a vaccine that could have unknown, rare adverse health effects, and then follow them for typically 1 to 4 years to see if they get sick or have bad vaccine side efects. If the vaccine works, slowly but surely you start to see differences in the disease rates between vaccinated and placebo groups. The time it takes depends on how many people naturally get exposed to the virus, and what % effective the vaccine is. We're socially distancing, which slows down people getting sick but it also slows down a vaccine study. It would be difficult to have results in only a few months. Sanofi and GSK are talking about having a candidate vaccine for manufacturing in late 2021, not late 2020, and that would be the fastest vaccine in history. This should give you pause about "Operation Warp Speed".

### Speed
Vaccine trials can be sped up in a few ways. First, choose people who are likely to be exposed to the virus. This is common and health care workers and first responders often volunteer for vaccine trials in the hope of some protection. The more of the study participants who are exposed, the faster you get results from the initial question of whether the vaccine is protective.

Second, if you know how much and which immune response is protective, the trial is much easier. Give people shots, see if they get enough neutralizing antibodies. Unfortunately we don't have that information.

The final way is a challenge study. This is done in animals as a matter of course in vaccine development, but typically not in humans. In a challenge, the cohort is vaccinated and in a few weeks they are deliberately exposed to SARS-CoV-2. Hypothetically it would take a fraction of the people and would also give insight as to how many antibodies are protective. Bioethicists are looking at the idea but it's not clear that it's fair to expose people to a dangerous virus with no treatment available. The only way to do it would be small group of healthy people in their 20s or 30s who had a complete understanding of what they were undertaking. Problem is, COVID-19 leaves some people with permanent heart or lung damage and we don't know who or why, so is it really possible to give subjects a complete understanding of what could happen to them? Antibody potention (more below) is also a concrete risk to challenge subjects. It could theoretically speed up development, but it still leaves open questions that require more typical large cohort studies anyway, like whether the vaccine has infrequent side effects, or whether it works in children and elderly adults.

### Barriers
Vaccines can be a bit of a crapshoot to develop. We do not have vaccines for norovirus, HIV, or herpes despite decades of work and promise in animal models. There is not a vaccine for the SARS or MERS coronaviruses yet. Even flu vaccine is hardly a magic bullet, with a lukewarm 40-60% efficacy even when they get the right strain. 

The HUGE risk for a COVID-19 vaccine is called "antibody potentiation". That's where having a partial vaccine response makes you sicker if you get COVID-19. The wrong antibodies help the virus get into cells rather than neutralizing it. Antibody potentiation has been barrier to developing vaccines for the related coronaviruses SARS and MERS. It won't be seen frequently, so we might not figure it out until well into the Phase 3 study.

Another thing that has to be worked out is how long the immunity lasts. For example, flu vaccine only lasts 3-6 months. How do you figure that out? Well, you vacinate people, wait, and check their antibodies. Checking to see if a vaccine gives you six months' immunity means you have to follow people for six months. There are no shortcuts and it's already May. Start in June, you don't have answers until January. Since we have no coronavirus vaccines, we have no clue of how long a vaccine could work.

Finally, nothing is known about how much antibody is protective. The companies running it in the trial will measure the volunteers' immune response but the numbers don't mean anything until a lot of people have been tested. What is the minimum titer needed to be safe? 5? 50? 200? 

### Vaccines from China
A vaccine from the country who poisoned their babies with melamine in formula? Hard pass. 

### Final Thoughs
Optimistically, the most science that has ever gone into a vaccine is being aimed at SARS-CoV-2. We may have the fastest vaccine in history, but it will almost certainly be 2021 at the earliest before something is ready for manufacture.

While I'd like to be enthusiastic about "Operation Warp Speed" I think it's more of a worry than an advantage. Companies were already in a mad rush to get a vaccine and the government was already providing funds. Mass production of a batch of potentially ineffective vaccines will either waste taxpayers money, or produce questionnable stock that might be forced onto people in a dangerous sunk costs fallacy.

This is a nice review about vaccine development.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4944327/

